## Code Book ##

1.	Firstly we use the the if(!file.exists) nested function In order to create the folder in which our dataset is to be downloaded. I named this folder as UCI_dataset. Secondly, I used the download.file function to download the zip file in the abovementioned folder, under the name “data_assignment.zip”
2.	After the file is downloaded, I manually unzipped the file. The name of the file is “UCI HAR Dataset”, size: 269 MB containing 2 folders (test & train) as well as 4 text files (activity_labels.txt, features.txt, features_info.txt, README.txt). Each of the abovementioned folders contain one folder and 3 text files each. The names of the files for the test and train folders are: subject_test.txt, X_test.txt, y_test.txt and subject_train.txt, X_train.txt, y_train.txt respectively. 
3.	Next, we read the text files using the read.table()  function. For each file we use the corresponding file name.
4.	In the next step we use str() function to to inspect the size and class of data tables. All three “test” tables have 2947 observations, with subject_test and  y_test tables having only 1 variable in contrast with X_test table which has 561 variables. As for train tables, observations are more than double compared to the “test” tables. More specifically, train dataset has 7352 observations, with subject_train and y_train having only one variable compared to X_train which has 561 variables.
5.	One of the rules for storing tidy data is choose good names for things. In this case variable names are in V1, V2 form which can be really confusing in a following data analysis. Therefore, based on course project help guide (L. Sandino), we assign the proper variable names based on features.txt ( List of all features) as well as activity_label.txt (Links the class labels with  their activity name) files located in the main dataset folder.  By opening those two files in a text editor we see that both have 2 variables. The first variable of activity_labels text file, is an id number corresponds to an activity located in the second column. As for the feature text file, it contains information about accelerometer and gyroscope raw signals, accompanied by the type of estimation applied to each of them (mean, standard deviation, mix, max etc.). The number of observations in the last file correspond to the names of each variable in the X_train and X_test datasets.
6.	In this step we assign the names in each variable based on the abovementioned. We create a new variable called f_names which contains the observations of features variable, assigning these values as variables names in X_test and X_train data frame by using the colnames() function. Concerning the y_train and x_train data frames, based on README.txt, the values of the containing variable corresponds to the activity id therefore we rename the columns to “id”.
7.	In order to create the merged dataset, we bind the test and train dataframes firstly by using the rbind fuction to create x, y, and subject dataframes and in the next stage the cbind function to merge all 3 dataframes to one (in the upper part of merged dataframe is the test dataset and above the train dataset). The name of the merged dataframe is Merged_data. 
8.	In this step , we need to extract measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement (step 2 in Data Project). To keep only the variables contain mean or std in their names, we use the grep() function, and we store the outcome in the selected_data dataframe. Given the fact that we want to include variables containing both mean and Mean (capital, lowercase) as well as Std and std, we use the following grep function grep("([M,m]ean|[S,s]td)". By selecting only those variables, we need to reattach the first two columns of the merged data set, giving this time the name “Merged” to the dataset. Finally we remove the “selected_data” dataframe, as well as Merged_data to keep only Merged dataframe which contains the desirable variables.
9.	In this step we need to change column 2 id’s with the corresponding activity name located at the activity_labels dataframe. For this we’ll use the subsetting command: Merged$id <- activity_labels[Merged$id,2] 
10.	In order to create descriptive variable names we’ll use the “gsub” function. By checking variable names it is obvious that there is accumulated information about what each variable is, accompanied by symbols ( parentheses, dashes etc.) making it difficult to understand what each variable represents. More specifically “t” at the start of variable name, stands for time and “f” for frequency. In addition, based on features_info.txt, we find that “Acc” is and abbreviation for Accelerometer as well as “Gyro”, “Mag” for Gyroscope and Magnitude respectively. Finally, we need to rename the second variable’s name (see 9), to “activity” instead of id and also, all statistics names, which are attached with symbols converted to something more eligible as: Mean instead of “-mean()” , StandardDev for “-std()” etc. 
11.	To create the second independed tidy data set, we load the “dplyr” package. We name the final data set as “HumActRecSmart” which refers to the Human Activity Recognition using smartphones dataset. Next we use the “summarize_all” function combined with “group_by” function in order to calculate the mean value for each subject-activity pair. 
12.	Finally we export the tidy dataset using the “write_table” function, as a HumActRecSmart.txt file, including the “row_names = F” argument, in order the index numbers not to be included in the text file.
